My story is very short, three little stories.
The unfortunate thing is that I can never remember the year I went on five India tours in a row, starting with 1989.
And I can't remember the place either. But Caroline you might remember because I think you were there at this first one.
And we were in a camp, all the ladies in one pental. And one day we suddenly had a message from somebody that there was a snake in the ladies pental, somewhere in the ladies pental there was a snake.
And suddenly there was all this screeching and oh my goodness, you know, everybody, all the women rushed back to the pental where all our belongings were, and we started to unpack all our cases to make sure the snake wasn't in there, empty the sleeping bags,
you know, looking in all the sleeping bags and looking under all the clothes and everything and it was like completely frantic, we were all rushing all over this do you remember that Caroline were you there.
I was there but I don't remember that.
I'm sure you were there because I have a feeling it was the same year that your marriage was matched your and Chris's.
And you know, it was the previous marriage Rosalind. Oh,
yeah, remember that.
Anyway, so we had this frantic afternoon I think he was trying to find if the snake was in our tent, and then to calm down a little bit and that nice of costume as you always used to come and talk to us in the evenings and she started to talk to us and
she was smiling and she said, you know, I believe that you've all been worried about the snake in the ladies tent.
She said I put it there.
Put it there on purpose to test your faith.
And she was kind of smiling and laughing as if we'd all failed that test.
And she was testing us to see if we would, I mean actually some of the yoginis were very calm, I think they were in that good state where they felt that, you know, nothing would happen to them.
I don't remember being so frantic myself either but I'm sure I didn't pass the test very well.
So, and then a lot of the memories I have of India tours this this is another one another year was just spending days and days and days traveling around on the coaches on the buses.
And we traveled one day again I'm sorry I don't remember the year or the place but I do have some diaries there in there in my loft and I need to get them down really and have a look at the years because most of it's written down in my diaries.
And we traveled one day for hours and hours and hours I think we stopped somewhere for lunch.
And we traveled, and we never, you know, nobody ever seemed to know where we were going. We sometimes said well let's try and find out this as the drivers. And you know in the Indian fashion the drivers just shut their head, you know, we didn't give us an answer.
We never knew where we were going. And we just traveled on and on and on that day, and in the evening they just took us to a block of flats, like a concrete block of flats, and we were told by somebody that that's where we were going to sleep that night.
And they didn't have anything with us at all we just had our show, you know, I used to go off on the tours we had a show, and a bottle of water and that was it, notice for snow bag, nothing.
And we just
we just lay down in these flats on concrete floors on the shore that's what we had no nothing to rest our heads on. And they said okay you're sleeping here now, I think we must have had something to eat, although I don't remember that.
And that's it we slept there, got up in the morning, we'd had the slept very well of course.
I think really, a lot of you will say the same probably there were tests of, you know, our comfort, it was to get over comfort as well wasn't it a lot of it.
So we got up in the morning had a little bit of breakfast I think they Indian yogis put some breakfast on for us and then we just traveled back all day to the camp, and that's all we did.
We just traveled to this one place, and I don't know to this day, why we were going there what we were doing. I'd love someone to tell us you know what we were doing but I mean, we know now that a lot of that was to vibrate different areas as well,
you know, she was using us using our Kundalini to vibrate different areas and probably other things as well.
And to get over the comfort, but we just, we just couldn't find out anything and one year and then by.
I took, I thought I must buy a map of India so I can at least follow where we're going and I bought this lovely map and took it with me and then one yogi came up and borrowed it and I never saw it.
That wasn't much use.
And then just one other short story is, we were, I think we were in Hyderabad one year.
And it's the same thing again. We were sent off all day somewhere on the coaches.
Sometimes we obviously used to go to temples and things didn't we but this particular day in Hyderabad, we didn't go anywhere, and we weren't given any lunch so we were out all day completely all day for hours and hours and hours.
And we didn't get any lunch and we started to get attached to that, you know, very much like well when are we going to eat.
And again we got back to the camp at night and Shamata Ji came, that was a very, very powerful evening that was I remember.
I remember something else about it.
Shamata Ji came in the evening, and she said, I'm very sorry that you didn't get any lunch today, I couldn't let you eat in this place because there's a very bad rakshasa that's always lived here, probably born there, and I couldn't let you eat anything in this place.
I remember that I've just remembered that night, she particularly remember this she was.
She didn't. At this point in time she wasn't saying very much and she just looked very intensely at each corner of the room that well the hall I mean you know it's a massive hall, and she looked at one corner of the whole really intensely and she didn't say anything.
And then she looked at the right hand corner of the hall.
I didn't say anything that you look down at the corner down on the left and then corner on the right. And she just literally moved ahead to those different corners and she was definitely destroying something that night, you know, she was.
She looked like the goddess that was on in a battle destroying something was very powerful.
So, whatever that was, and there's a side yoga I met an Indian yogi who came to England and told me that, you know, we didn't, he wasn't around then he came from Hyderabad.
And he told me that he said oh I must let you know that it's very good there now there's a big collective there and it's whatever it was has been cleared.
So, that was very powerful.
And that's it really, that's, I have to do a lot of other stories but just keep it short for now.
Well it's lovely and Rosanne Thank you very much.
And Elizabeth, would you like me to immediately start share that first photograph.
No, not yet.
Okay, first photograph will be towards the end I'll tell you when. Okay.
So, well, unlike some of you.
In the 1970s I knew absolutely nothing Sri Mataji inside yoga.
So I already left England by then.
Believe it or not, Jeremy, are you there.
I wanted to be a teacher since starting school in Coventry at the age of five.
So to get to I say, as soon as I left school.
I opted for a four year degree course in French and Italian at Exeter University that included a year as an English assistant in a lise in Clermont-Ferrand in France.
Well, after graduating in 1968 I married a French teacher I'd met while teaching in Clermont and went to live in central France. What had I done there.
The marriage was an absolute disaster immediately, not only that, but I had to wait until 1979. That's 11 years for divorce to be made legal in France.
Before I could escape.
And in the meantime I studied to qualify as an English teacher in France.
In 1980, this is where mother started to come to it.
In 1980, the French government posted me to the International School in Fermi-Volterra, which is on the French-Swiss border, just outside Geneva.
And it was there that I first heard of Sartre yoga in 1985.
So, to cut a long story short, in 1986 and 87 I went on the India tours with the Swiss Sartre yogis.
I was rather nervous about going as I'd spent the summer of 1985 in Kashmir and Ladakh.
And I developed hepatitis there.
And went on the Hindu pilgrimage to Amarnath on a diet of rice and water, having lost 10 kilos and feeling very very weak.
Whereas the first two tours that I did with Sartre yoga, I survived quite easily, without any such tapasya at all.
In 1988, I went on my third Sartre yoga tour, but it started earlier than in the previous years. I couldn't get time off before the end of term, I couldn't get time off school.
And the main group had already left.
But fortunately, I wasn't alone.
Matthias Kaluzny and I flew to Bombay.
And then we took a taxi to Pratistan.
This was before mother's house was built, of course.
The taxi dropped us off with our suitcases not far from the big tent.
Strangely enough, there was no one around.
It didn't take long to find out why.
We'd arrived in the middle of a pooja and mother was already there.
I dumped my cases outside the pendulum and sneaked into a corner of the back of the pendulum, feeling very conspicuous and uncomfortable.
Because I wasn't wearing a sari.
And I wasn't at all fresh after the journey.
At the end of the pooja, my mother was giving up presents.
I decided to take my suitcase up to the tents to find a place where I could freshen up and change into a sari.
I was about to do so when two yogis appeared.
I didn't know either of them. What were they doing there in the ladies' tent?
One of them, who turned out to be Javier Valderrama, the leader in Milan, asked me, are you Elizabeth from Switzerland?
Yes. Why?
This is your husband, Nicola. What?
It was such a shock. I must have gaped at them, absolutely speechless and incredulous because I hadn't filled in a marriage application.
In fact, I was quite allergic to the idea of marrying again after my previous marriage, which had lasted for 10 extremely traumatic years.
And I was bringing up my two children who were now teenagers on my own.
But for some reason I just couldn't react. I couldn't protest.
I just surrendered.
That was no doubt due to the effect of the pooja.
But it was also because nobody had said anything to me beforehand.
As I had arrived during the pooja and hadn't seen or spoken to anybody.
Mother had organised everything in such a way that I just couldn't react.
This was confirmed when Nicola and I did namaska to Shrimataji before the wedding.
Can you put the photo up please Caroline, the first one.
That's it.
Mother looked at me with such a sweet, loving smile on her face and said, don't think.
And it was obvious
that everything had been done by the Divine. It was all worked out, it was all arranged.
I had nothing to say, nothing to do, nothing to think about. It was all done for me.
I even learned later that Mother
had been through all the India tour application forms and picked me out.
Even though I hadn't filled in a marriage application.
J Shrimataji, that's my story.
Can you show the last photographs? Has the photograph changed?
No.
Yeah, I think I need to think you're rubbing it in.
Then, let me see.
The others are after the wedding.
Well,
there are only three or four, I think.
Yes, that's right.
Nicola and me at the wedding.
Yeah, I'm trying to.
That's not changed has it? Yes, that's changed. What year was that Elizabeth?
It was 1988.
Oh, I thought I recognised that.
The 28th of December, my son's birthday, the night wedding day.
1988.
And has it changed again now Elizabeth? Yes. Excellent. That's the last one after the wedding, looking very relaxed, surprising.
photographs, knowing what how it has happened. I, you know, I was really in South Australia.
Thank you. That's wonderful.
Thank you so much Elizabeth.
And, Antoinette.
I'm going to, I don't know if you can start before I need to open the photographs. I don't know if you can start before I do that.
Yeah, okay.
And
do you need the photographs at first Antoinette or? Well, I just wanted to, as I said to you, I wanted to talk a bit about the general atmosphere and the rivers that we were discovering in India, on India tour.
And it was Shrimataji would send us into the river, not only to wash our clothes that we did together, you know, it was very fun, all the ladies washing their salaries there, and then putting them on the on the shore to dry in the sun.
It was great fun but she also said to take the, the, the molasses of the at the bottom of the river, they were very shallow, and also very the water was very soft, very sweet there was no.
It was not hard water at all. And she said to put the, the, the clay, it's clear that's the word I was looking for clay on our faces, because it's very good for the skin.
So I don't have the photo here I don't I don't know where is the photo I had that but we were all having this kind of gray or dark lay on our faces that we looked very funny.
I have a photo of it but unfortunately I didn't find it for that but I mean that's the river. And on another occasion or so I'm going to talk a bit more about a particular river, but she also said to drink the water of the river because it's very good for the Nabi.
So, yes, the river in India are just incredibly beautiful. So I can share now. I think there should be foot soaking along the river. Oh yeah, that's also Yeah, no, that's not the one I want to know that that's a meal on the banana.
Has that changed now. Yeah, that's one. Yeah, yeah. So Bigfoot so I don't remember which relate might be Brahma Puri because I recognize the rocks, but it might be any other kind of Yamuna River or, you know, one of these rivers in Maharashtra didn't put the name behind the photo so I don't know but it was quite the site.
Everybody foot soaking like that. And I have another photo I think I gave you, Caroline of us in the river, bathing and washing the laundry and bathing. Yeah, that's it. Yeah, yeah, that's very sweet. I think it's very Lakshmi kind of photo.
And, yeah, so we did that very often, you know, kind of when we were in India.
And then, yeah, I don't have a photo of the Brahma Puri River, but I have a very beautiful story about the Brahma Puri River, also named the Sri Krishna River.
And I don't know if you might know, I have two diaries that I kind of wrote from 1978 to 1996.
And because she might have asked me to write things down, because later on, people will want to know. So I'm going to read out of my diary This is really accurate, and that was actually 1986, the, the 10 April, 10 April 1986, and I'm going to translate it from French into English.
So I say here, before the trip to India has left unforgettable experiences. There are three in particular, which has marked my return to the Mother India.
So I'm going to talk only about the first one. The first one was Brahma Puri at the banks of the river Krishna, where Shri Mataji had come to baste her feet, surrounded by all the sajaja yogis who came one after the other to get her blessings.
So I was evidently amongst them. In the beginning, Shri Mataji told me, you need to look after your Vishuddhi, your hands are pink.
My attention, the previous days was not that clear. And I was still kind of being worried about things from home. So she asked me to massage her feet in the water.
Then she said to me, better now. And I was feeling the vibrations really clearly. The circle around Shri Mataji was so tight, she was sitting actually on a rock.
And there's a beautiful photo of her there, but unfortunately I don't have that photo. So the circle was so tight that I couldn't actually get out of the river.
So I found a little spot on a stone just at the feet of Shri Mataji, very close to her. And my feet were in the water. It was just two feet away from her.
On the other side, there was my brother, Cregoire. Then Shri Mataji spoke about the right Vishuddhi. She said to my brother and to me to say, mother, I'm not French. And she said that we had to correct this right Vishuddhi.
So then later on, I saw a photo which had been taken about this moment by a Saja Yogi. I think it was Antonio Saracino, actually, one of the Italians.
And you can see a triangle of light coming out of the ankle of Shri Mataji. It's a miraculous photo and it's very beautiful. It's two rays of light coming out of a right Vishuddhi.
And that must have been at that moment. So then a very beautiful event happened at that point.
So there were some Saja Yogis coming through the river to get Shri Mataji's blessing. And I remember there was an Algerian Saja Yogi who was quite new in Saja Yoga.
And when she came close to her in the river, he had a kind of revelation and said, Hala wakba, hala wakba.
So he recognized actually that Shri Mataji was Allah. And it was very moving. He was in the Sri Krishna river, recognizing who Shri Mataji was, identifying Shri Krishna, I mean, Hala to Shri Mataji.
And then there was another Saja Yogi who was Norwegian. He was very tall and he was an executive in one of the UN kind of, how do you say, in the UN.
And he knelt in front of Shri Mataji in the water. He was very tall. And Shri Mataji took some water from the river and put it gently on his head saying, I couldn't baptize you when you were a baby, so I baptize you now. And that was like a biblical moment as well. Very beautiful.
So then I remember we were just completely enchanted by this amazing sceneries. And we started to a chorus in a cappella all around the river. It was beautiful.
We sang first Kundalini Kundalini Shri Mata Mata Mataji. You know this one.
Kundalini Kundalini Shri Mata Mata Mataji. You know this one, I'm sure. And then the other one was,
Mother, how I adore you, all my life I give you, how I love you.
And again in chorus, all the Saja Yogis around the river singing and Shri Mataji was silent and the vibrations were tremendous.
I mean, it is an amazing memory. I must say I remember that.
So, yes, here I write, shortly after that this Norwegian Saja Yogi wrote at the end of his diary that it was the end of his earthly trip.
He wanted to leave this earth. He had his realization. I mean, he was an elderly man.
When he came six weeks after his return, upon his return at home, he actually died very passively, very peacefully in his sleep.
So, at Brahmapuri, we have, we drank also the water of the river.
It was, there was clay in the water, but it was so cool and so good. The taste was very nice.
And Shri Mataji said, it won't harm you. It is very good for your Nabi.
So, there we are. So, it was beautiful. That's one event.
Well, I mean, I'm not going to take too much time because...
But tell me when you want me to show... Sorry?
Tell me when you want me to change the photograph.
You have, I mean, you showed me two of the rivers.
Yeah, but I have also the other photographs you sent.
Yeah, maybe you can send, I mean, just to give an atmosphere for those who haven't been at that time.
I mean, someone talked about the buses and I think it would be lovely to see the photo of the buses.
There they are, with all our luggage at the top.
And it was all the men who had to actually lift all the suitcases and put them on the top of the buses.
So, we were asked, the ladies, not to have too heavy luggage, you know, because can you imagine for them.
And like the first Yogini said, we would travel for hours. I remember sometimes 12 hours in the buses.
And sometimes there was so much dust in the road that it was quite difficult.
It was catching our throat and we were putting our sari in front of our mouth.
And then a bus leader said, just put your attention on Sri Mataji and Sri Krishna and think that the dust is actually from Mother Earth, from India, Bumi Devi.
And you will not be irritated by the dust.
And we did. We said the mantra actually. And then it was over. We didn't feel this kind of dusty throat again.
So yeah, that's a memory which just came back in my mind.
Yeah, the buses journey was epic, I must say.
So also, well, I just want to quickly say about the meals. The meals were delicious. And you just showed this picture there.
They were served on banana leaves and they were cooked beside.
And I have another photo that you can show afterwards where the kitchen was with all the tomatoes, etc.
And it was always obviously organic food. And sometimes they even cooked chicken for us because they knew we were not vegetarian.
It was just delicious every time. Always warm food. And I didn't think there was a tapasya there. It was really nice.
But yes, I agree that sometimes we would have our meals at one o'clock in the morning.
So not at kind of scheduled times. It was just when we would come after a program, sometimes very late at night.
But still, we were advised not to go to bed and eat our food because sometimes we didn't know when the next meal would happen.
So it was important to eat at the time we were asked to have our food.
It was all very fast and we need to be... It was a big test on our attention. We just need to be very... We needed to be very collective and have a good attention.
So, yeah, that's just a little glimpse of part of a kitchen with all the cauliflowers and all the tomatoes there, all the vegetables.
So these are all just quick snapshots.
Oh, yeah, somebody talked about the tent and the snake. There you are.
We have a ladies' pandal with all the suitcases that was at the bottom of our feet.
And you see how we were there. Very cozy, but quite a bit squashed sometimes. But no, it was fine.
It was very, very homely, actually. I never had any problems in a tent. It was just really... We had laughter.
So we could have some very nice chats sometimes. But look how they would do at the top.
The roof was all kind of done with maybe old cotton saris. But, yeah, that's our pandal, the ladies' tent.
The other one is... Yeah, that was just to show an Indian wedding very early on. I think it was 1982, this one.
And I was asked to be the mother of the couple there who is Deepak and Amrata.
And I was so honoured. This is me with a white sari and with red flower on it.
And I took it so seriously, so at heart. And Shrimataji was very happy.
That was actually my first ever tour in India so early on. I think 1982 or 1983.
And I was just awed by this beautiful ceremony of these Indian weddings.
So, yeah. Now, oh, yeah, there's another photo of me. Oh, no, that's...
Do you want me to show the photo of you?
Yeah, yeah, that's me. Oh, yeah. Sorry, hang on.
No, no, you were OK. I just wanted to show... That was before the wedding.
Yeah, that's me and Ellora, so looking quite young at that time.
And then there was another photo of all of us before our weddings, our sahaj weddings.
Would that be the talk to the yogis, this one?
Yeah, talk to the yogis, exactly there. So we have quite a few here.
And Shrimataji is talking to all the future married couples there.
I recognize quite a few and I'm just there in yellow, in the yellow saree there.
So, yeah, that's it for the photos. I would just like... I mean, is that... I mean, I think...
I personally feel if Maria Amelia doesn't mind, that we'll finish on your stories today, Antoinette, and just save all of Maria Amelia's for next time.
It seems a little shame to cut short you and also to give Maria Amelia very little time to talk today.
Yeah, well, I have only one more story, if you want, about music, you know, which was...
I mean, obviously I could talk the whole night about India. I have so many stories.
And let me just... can I just check? Is that OK with you, Maria Amelia?
Of course it is, of course. I'm recognizing these pictures as well.
Yeah, of course, we were always there. So it's about Radhakrishna Temple.
It was a music evening with some local bhajan singers. It was so beautiful.
So that was the 4th of February, 1984. I wrote the same evening program, bhajan of Shri Mataji.
Shri Mataji was surreal of beauty in a white sari with a pink border.
We were all sitting down on the all kind of very comfortable white, thin mattresses.
And the singers were all in a kurta with their little hat. I don't know how it is called, the hat they had.
And they had an amazing rhythm and an intensity and a unity which was absolutely breathtaking.
And they were singing the sacred poetry of the good deeds of the saint called Makandeya.
The praise of the good deeds and the... how do you say? The praise of the sacred poetry.
Yeah, the praises of self-realization of the saints of Maharashtra.
And it was not actually one, it was about Machindranath.
And at the end of their singing, they actually recognized Shri Mataji for who she was.
And identified their singing because they were singing to God.
And then they recognized that actually Shri Mataji was God, which was extremely moving.
And they all were kind of going at her feet, bowing down to her.
And for us it was profoundly moving.
Shri Mataji had an expression of deep joy.
And she left us, blessing us all.
And the saris on which she had sat down and had put her feet had such strong vibrations.
We were covered in vibrations.
And then the fragrance of the Indian garland were filling the night.
And we were completely drenched in that perfume.
I write here,
Le tou et est dans mon differant.
The whole was from another world and shanti, shanti, shanti.
So yeah, that was a beautiful experience.
Okay, I can end here. I mean, I have all other ones, but we'll have other occasions.
Yes, but Antoinette, would you like to just share one more story before you finish?
Okay, yeah, I have a nice story, which is not out of my diary because I know it's completely by heart.
That was at the concert with young children, teenagers actually from 12 to 16.
And I still remember it was a very sunny day and we were all in a white pendal, a small pendal.
And there was an orchestra of kind of teenager from like 13 to 16 or 17 who were not singing,
but they were all playing different instruments without a paper, just like that.
I was absolutely amazed. And I'll head the task. She matters. She had orchestrated that completely.
I had the task to hold her bag and sit next to her.
So I had her back on my lap and I was next to her.
And at some point in my heart, I've said I was elated by the music and the complete unity of this young orchestra.
And I prayed in my heart and I said, wouldn't it be beautiful to have children who give so much beautiful music and joy to the world?
And yeah, I was like in meditation. At that point, she turned to me and asked me to give her her purse.
So I gave her her purse, opened the bag, gave her her purse.
And she gives me some Indian money to go and distribute to the children out there because that's the way they do also with kawali.
So I was completely elated to have to do that. And I took this money and I gave to the children their art.
And then I went and sat down next to Shrimataji again and I namaskar to her with a big smile.
And she smiled back at me. And lo and behold, three years later, I had my three girls.
They were born very close together, the twins just one year after Mahadevi.
And they are all very musical, have beautiful voice and sing to delight the world.
So that's it. That's beautiful. It's wonderful.
Yeah, it's a beautiful memory, this one. Okay, thank you. I leave it there.
Well, thank you. I'm just going to stop the recording. I hope.
I'll stop sharing and then I shall stop.